Revelation 5, 8.
And when he had taken it, the four living creatures and the 24 elders fell down before the lamb.
Each one had a harp, and they were holding golden bowls of incense, which are the prayers of God's people.
Psalm 56, 8.
Record my misery.
List my tears on your scroll.
Are they not in your record?
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
Russell taught me to ride a motorcycle when I was 22 in New York City.
We grew up together in the same town, friends from childhood, and now here we are just across the George Washington Bridge in a Panera Bread parking lot in New Jersey while he's trying to teach me how to use the clutch.
And I would ride motorbikes alongside him all the time for the next couple of years until this one morning when he was found splayed out on the road by a passing driver.
Got up early to catch the sunrise and pray, but never made it to his destination.
Life flighted by helicopter to the hospital, comatose.
Mid-20s, married just a few months prior, his wife, Katie, stunned by his bedside.
Russell and I shared a church community, and that whole community then rallied to pray.
Prayer gatherings every single night of the week, just one simple request in the ear of the Lord, Father Wake, Russell up.
More than a week passed, nothing.
Doctors told Katie all hope was lost, just waiting on her okay to pull the plug.
She was hysterical, broken in the kind of way that most people are never broken.
And Katie was in the room holding his hand saying, one last goodbye when Russell opened his eyes.
She threw the waiting room door open to the hospital, grabbed my friend, Caleb, who happened to be sitting there praying, saying, Russell's awake, Russell's awake, and then danced with him around that hospital waiting room, laughing as hysterically as she had wept.
I found out from my older brother, Josh, he called me.
a Saturday in late winters, gray outside, late in the afternoon.
I picked up the phone.
He didn't even say hello.
He just said, Russell woke up.
And it was about an hour later, you remember this, Jay?
I met you at a street corner in the Lower East Side, and we lit cigars together in celebration.
Didn't inhale, though, so it was all above board.
God heard our prayers.
I was in a security line at LaGuardia Airport at 4.45 a.m. on a Tuesday morning when I heard Tyler stating it was Sunday, the name, not the day.
He was one of those people that I'm pretty sure doesn't sleep and never really has to, always full of life, always loud in the good kind of way, laughing and hopeful and fun.
And he was on the same flight as me.
I was on the way to Chicago and he had a layover in Chicago on his way to Texas to visit his family.
We sat together on that flight and I listened as he talked about this new job he had just gotten and how excited he was to finally be breaking into the fashion industry and at his dream company.
He was due to start the next week when he got back from visiting his family.
And we bought sandwiches together in the Chicago airport.
And I remember saying, all right, man, I'll see you back in New York.
And one more time, congrats.
He got a headache at his mom's house that weekend and laid down on her couch and never stood back up.
Brain aneurysm.
He wasn't coming back to New York.
He was comatose on life support in some Texas hospital.
And so our community, we rallied to pray again the same way we had before.
There was this cafe and Queens right around the corner from his apartment that was willing to open up their back room.
And we held prayer meetings there every single night of the week, just one very simple prayer over and over again in the ear of the Lord.
Father, wake Sunday up.
A couple weeks later, they pulled the plug.
Sunday did not wake up.
God apparently did not hear our prayers this time.
Now I've shared both of those stories before.
They hold for me prayer's most guttural tension.
And I share them again today not to tell you something novel about my life, but to awaken something very personal within your own.
A prayer shaped life is one of a reverent, awestruck astonishment, and it is one of debilitating, doubled over disappointment.
And it is into that very mystery intention that we plunge this evening.
We're in the second month of a teaching series on the long-range view of prayer, who I've become over the years and decades between dear gods and amens.
And as we near the end, we're getting very practical.
How do I order my life each day of my life so that I grow ever more devoted to prayer?
And the way that we do that here at Bridgetown is the same way that the church has done that historically.
We pause to pray three times a day, morning, midday, and evening.
In the morning we pray scripture, in the evening we pray the examine, that's next week, but up for tonight is that midday we pray compassion, which we practice through the exercise of intercessory prayer.
That's where we're headed, intercessory prayer, but the only way there is through the emotionally treacherous minefield of answered prayer,
and unanswered prayer.
And so we'll begin tonight with the mystery of answered prayer.
Now I suppose we could begin with Russell's story with the supernatural way that prayer sometimes seems to work.
And I mean that in the most plain sense possible, supernatural, as in prayer sometimes seems to bend the laws of science making the impossible possible.
You know, like a sea splitting wide open so that an oppressed people group can march to freedom or like a paralytic.
Standing up, rolling up as Matt and jogging back home or like Russell's eyes opening in spite of all the most advanced medical data indicating otherwise.
We could start there but to be entirely honest, I'm more of a like dark moody drama that makes you feel something kind of guy than like a light laughs and easy going whatever kind of guy.
So why don't we plunge right into the conundrum of Sunday's story?
The occasions when the door of prayer seems to slam shut right in our faces without even so much as a no.
Just silence.
Why did Russell wake up and Sunday didn't?
And both of them followed Jesus, both ended up in that condition by freak accidents, not of their own fault.
Both of them were backed by the same praying community, the same type of prayer.
In many cases, the exact same prayer from the very same lips, identical in every way, saved the first name of the person being prayed for.
Why?
That's the obvious question.
And it's a vast question.
It's one that you certainly have your own uniquely painful version of it is one that no answer, no matter how complete or coherent it may be, will ever entirely satisfy.
But even with that caveat, we cannot talk about the intercessory sort of prayer that hastens God's compassion without offering some sort of response to that question.
So here you go.
Every single time you pray,
You utter requests to the Father who loves to give good gifts to His children, and every single time you pray, you loft those requests into the complex web of God's world, God's war, and God's will.
Now, I'm borrowing that terminology from my friend and mentor, Pete Gregg, but read whoever you want.
Call it whatever you want.
Those are the three ingredients in the complex, mysterious recipe of prayer.
First, God's world.
My kids got really into the baseball playoffs this year.
So we were over to neighbor's house cheering on the Mariners in game seven against the Blue Jays a few weeks ago.
And it came down to the wire, bottom of the ninth, one run game, winner goes to the World Series.
Now in that moment, I'd be willing to bet a pretty large sum of money that my nine year old Hank, under his breath, whispered, Dear God, please help the Mariners win.
But I'd be willing to bet the same sum of money that somewhere in Toronto some other nine-year-old was praying, dear God, please let the Blue Jays win.
So how does God decide?
How does he pick which nine-year-old's prayer to answer?
I'm sorry to disappoint your sports fans.
He doesn't.
You see, God is the creator.
God intricately designed a world that sustains life and affords us love and joy, and the vast majority of the time the world God created works well for most people.
Most babies are born healthy, most people do not suffer debilitating loss due to natural disaster, and most people don't have their years limited by a diagnosis.
God isn't a micromanager.
He called his creation good and very good before the serpent's deception, and even though the deceivers lie carries consequences for the creation itself, like the fact that some babies are not born healthy or at all.
And some people do experience tragic loss due to natural disaster.
And some people's lives are cut short by a diagnosis, even though God's designed a world without any of those stories and even without death itself at first.
And even though every ounce of suffering in this world is a consequence that God promises to redeem, his world is still mostly good, most of the time, for most people.
So he tends not to meddle in who wins baseball games.
It was the Blue Jays.
They lost to the Dodgers in the World Series.
Money doesn't buy happiness, but it does buy championships.
And God mostly doesn't bother with that.
If every bride had a sunny day for her wedding, every farmer's crop would fail and we would all starve.
CS Lewis put it like this.
that God can and does on occasions modify the behavior of matter and produce what we call miracles as part of the Christian faith.
But then he goes on to add the very conception of a common and therefore stable world demands that these occasions should be extremely rare.
So there's God's world and then God's war.
Jesus taught all of his apprentices to pray, your kingdom come, your will be done on earth as it is in heaven, which implies that God's will being done is neither the current reality, nor is it the immediate inevitability.
Let me say that in a little bit of a more clear way that's gonna make some of you immediately uncomfortable.
God doesn't always immediately get his way, even though he's God.
For instance, at this very moment, an estimated 12 million children are victims of trafficking and exploitation globally.
And the trafficking and exploitation of a child is not God's will.
Not today and not ever.
According to our most recent and reliable data, 15% to 20% of women in America have been victimized by sexual abuse.
And the sexual exploitation and stealing of a woman's dignity is not the will of God.
Not today.
and not ever.
According to the biblical story, every trace of evil and suffering in God's world is not the product of the Creator's good design, but the serpent's crafty deception and humanity's ongoing propensity to believe the lies of that serpent.
It's evil that God promised to deal with all the way back in Eden by claiming that he would enter the bloodline of human history himself to crush the serpent's head.
God is just.
perfectly and entirely just, and he will restore his world to working order and redeem every rock wrong to every last one of his children in the end.
In the meantime, while he's empowered all of his apprentices to join in the war, to win back every square inch of his world, to the reign of the only just and loving king, how do we do that?
What are the weapons of our warfare?
Prayer, this kind of prayer.
your kingdom come, your will be done on earth today as it is in heaven.
God's world, God's war, and then God's will.
First John chapter five reads, this is the confidence we have in approaching God that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
And if we know that he hears us, whatever we ask, we know that we have what we ask to them.
Love the sentiment there.
But what's with the fine print about God's will, Johnny?
Like, where'd you get that idea?
We got to remember that John wasn't just an apprentice of Jesus.
He was among the 12.
And he wasn't just among the 12.
He was in the inner ring.
He was a part of the core three.
And Jesus invited those three, Peter, James, and John, to pray with him on a number of occasions.
John had prayer meetings with fraternity.
He listened.
as the God the Father was called out to by God the incarnate Son through the interceding power of the Holy Spirit.
That's a pretty hot ticket.
And one of those prayer meetings, the last one that he attended, in fact, happened to Gethsemane just before Jesus' arrest and crucifixion when he heard this prayer from the lips of Jesus.
My Father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me, yet not as I will, but as you will.
Jesus entrusted his sincere request to God's perfect will and wisdom.
Jesus was humble enough to pray something like, God, if what seems best to me isn't in the end the most redemptive route, then keep the heart of my longing, but answer my prayer your way.
To pray with Jesus means to pray both your kingdom come and your will be done.
I want your redemption, and here's how I want it, Father.
but I trust your way even more than I trust mine.
And if that's how Jesus prayed, that's how I'll pray too.
God's world, God's war, and God's will, that is the mysterious recipe of prayer.
So yes, sometimes prayer is answered.
If by answered you mean, God's will perfectly aligned with my own in a supernatural way that bent the laws of science to accomplish.
But I think if we're taking our cues from the Bible, answered prayers actually much more broad than that, and therefore much more frequent in our lives than that, which brings us to the assurance of unanswered prayer.
Scripture makes it clear that God collects two things, prayers and tears.
This world in its current form is passing away, but our prayers and tears are eternal.
God collects your prayers.
In Revelation 5, that first root of our teaching text, we read, and the 24 elders fell down before the lamb, each had a harp, and they were holding golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of God's people.
Now, do you realize what that means?
It means that every prayer you've ever whispered from the simplest throwaway request to the most heartfelt cry, God has collected it like a scrapbooking grandmother collects.
It taught their scribbles.
God has treasured up every prayer you've ever uttered, even the ones that you have forgotten, and he is still weaving their fulfillment, bending all of human history in the direction of one great yes to you and me.
Revelation doesn't end with God as merely a scrapbook and grandmother, though.
It shows us that God is also a powerful redeemer.
These heavenly golden prayer bowls, they show up again three chapters later in Revelation 8.
Another angel who had a golden censure came and stood at the altar.
He was given much incense to offer with the prayers of all God's people on the golden altar in front of the throne.
The smoke of the incense, together with the prayers of God's people, went up before God from the angel's hand.
Then the angel took the censure, filled it with fire from the altar, and hurled it on the earth.
And there came peels of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.
At the proper time, God is tipping this prayer bowl, pouring out our requests onto the earth.
He has collected every prayer you've ever prayed and redemption comes when he reigns those prayers on the earth once and for all.
The renewal of the world, heaven and earth restored begins with God pouring out the prayers of his children like a purifying fire over all creation and one great thunderous resounding, yes.
Every prayer
that is in concert with God's renewal, in the end, is an answered prayer.
Some, like those that were prayed for Sunday to wake up, are still awaiting that yes, but it's coming.
Sunday will wake up and he will never go back to sleep.
That is the kind of redeemer that we're praying to.
God collects your prayers the very way that a father collects his children's requests.
Last Saturday, Hank played in a basketball tournament, and his team got run out of the building.
I don't mean like they lost, I meant like, oh, they lost.
And so when we were driving home, I figured he could use a little bit of encouragement.
And so I said, Hank, you're a great basketball player, buddy.
And then I started to point out the things that I thought he did well during the game.
And I was interrupted by Simon, my middle child, sitting next to Hank in the back seat because he popped up to say, Dad, do you think I'm a great basketball player?
Now, what's he asking?
He's asking to be great, maybe even greater at basketball than his older brother Hank.
I mean, that's what he's asking in the ears of his brothers with whom he is sharing the back seat, but not in the ears of his father who's driving the car.
Now, his father hears what he's really asking.
Can I be special in your eyes?
Can I be noticed, affirmed, loved in a way that I can hear in your voice when you talk to me and feel in your presence when you're close to me?
That's what Simon's really asking.
He just doesn't know how to ask it that plainly.
And you know what?
I have no idea if little sigh will be greater at basketball than Hank, and I couldn't care less.
I don't care if Simon finds life in basketball or badminton or skateboarding or sculpting or playing the oboe.
I just want him in whatever he pursues to feel seen, chosen, delighted in, and loved by me in a way that frees his God-knit, God-breathed true self to live courageously in a deceived world.
And that's how God hears you when you pray through the ears of a father.
That's how God will weave the fulfillment of your prayers.
through the perfect will of the only perfectly loving Father.
And that means a few different things.
It means God's probably answered a lot more of your prayers than you give them credit for.
It means that God will satisfy your desires.
But maybe not in the way that you're asking because you don't know how to ask for it is that you really, truly want.
But when you ask for anything, he hears your deepest longing even when you don't know how to articulate it to him.
And lastly, it means that when he pours out that heavenly bowl where he's been keeping all of your prayers, it will feel like an overwhelming safety, security, fearlessness, and love crawling from your toes all the way up to your head, warming you from the inside out and then coating this whole earth in the renewal of his and God saw that it was good.
But what if that's the furthest thing?
from your current experience of prayer.
Like, what if for you tonight God's presence isn't warm, but it's entirely absent in the midst of all of your crying out, at least in your felt experience?
Or what if your desires seem out of his reach or even worse than that?
What if your desires seem just not on his mind?
God collects prayers, but he also collects your tears.
Psalm 56, the other half of our teaching text reads, you have kept count of my tossings, put my tears in your bottle.
Are they not in your book?
So prayer is asking.
It is looking from the vantage point of heaven onto the earth and pointing God into the mess.
But prayer is also weeping.
It is when the mess is so thick, we cannot see to God in heaven.
And through the thick of our blindness, we scream, God, I cannot take this any longer.
It says in Psalm 126 verse 5, those who sow with tears will reap with songs of joy.
Subscription councils that not only will God collect every tear, he will redeem every tear.
God is not only bottling up every tear that you cry, he also promises that every tear of yours in mind that falls from your cheek and hits the soil of this world will grow the garden city of the world to come.
God will bend history, he will twist the story to be sure that the pain that you feel releases the power of new life and that the tears that you cry become the seeds of a new and better world.
We are promised that a day is coming when the Father himself will wipe away every tear from our eyes.
But as we wait on that day, we're living on an in-between promise that I won't let a single one of your tears be wasted.
God does more than just bring a future into our pain.
God presently redeems our pain by turning the agony of waiting on answered prayer into the power of redemption, turning the tears that we shed into the seeds of new creation.
The biblical book of Isaiah is among the most optimistic, hopeful, wide-eyed of all of the prophetic utterances.
Just as we approach Christmas and we celebrate the light of Jesus breaking the dark, just notice which prophet we're quoting over and over and over and over.
Isaiah is a book full of light, but man, it is dark, and I mean dark, for 39 chapters.
And then the whole collection of prophecies turns on the hinge of the first words of Isaiah chapter 40.
Comfort, comfort my people says your God.
Speak tenderly to Jerusalem.
God's arriving in the life of the suffering, the disappointed, the angry, the hopeless, the self-deprecating, the heartbroken praying person.
It's not as heroic rescue or not first, but as co-suffering comforter.
God promises that heroic rescue will follow that, but God's arrival in our pain is comfort first.
Comfort, comfort my people.
Speak tenderly to her, to him.
Making it all right comes after you know that he's collected every one of your tears.
So Lord, I just pray right now.
Holy Spirit, would you draw near with the presence of Jesus
to the one who is in pain, to the one who is lonely, to the one who is lost, to the one who is beating himself up with self-condemnation, self-deprecation, self-hatred, self-improvement, self-correction,
which is just drawn near to them right now.
And in this very moment, not by my words, but by your whisper, which you comfort, comfort, comfort your people.
Speak tenderly to him.
Speak tenderly to her.
Come in.
Okay, so we've done it.
We've gingerly wandered through the complex minefield to arrive at the labor of love intercessory prayer.
Intercession is the technical term for the kind of prayer that we bring to God at midday.
It's the simple and straightforward request for God to bring good into the life of another.
protection from my daughter today at school, for my wandering friend to meet Jesus, for my sick neighbor to be healed, for my depressed family member to be delivered, for my coworker to accept my invitation, all of that and so much more falls under the banner of intercessory prayer.
And all intercessory prayer is the ultimate expression of compassion.
Like we're not talking about some real life version of wishes to a genie that occasionally comes true if you rub the lamp just right.
We're talking about the kind of prayers that start with sincere love for somebody else and then end by inviting God's power to partner with my love.
In the words of Richard Foster, if we truly love people, we will desire for them far more than is within our power to give them.
This will lead us to prayer.
Intercession is a way of loving others.
Intercessory prayer is a selfless prayer, even a self-giving prayer, and the ongoing work of the kingdom of God, nothing is more important than intercessory prayer.
Intercessory prayer is loving another so much that what I want for them most, only God can give.
Intercessory prayer then is the ultimate expression of compassion with hope.
Because if God's power is going to join my love for another, I equally have to have hope that God collects every tear and prayer that I offer and that He has vested me with a consequential role in bringing heaven to earth one prayer and one person at a time.
Philosopher Neil Van Lewin coined the term continual reality tracking for the way children can knowingly suspend disbelief.
Like summarizing a whole series of psychological studies, he explains,
that a child will make Play-Doh cookies and pretend to eat them.
They'll even invite an adult to sit down to a tea party with them and pretend to share those cookies.
But if that adult picks up one of those Play-Doh cookies and takes an actual bite out of it, it will startle the child, not delight them.
It will scare them before they enjoy it because the child knows deep down that it's all just pretend.
They're just more adept at suspending disbelief to enter into their pretence than you and I are as adults.
And many of us pray that way.
We pray in a conversation with God that we enjoy, but we practice prayer with a low enough expectation that if God actually invaded our world with heaven, it would startle us, scare us, surprise us before it delights us.
I mean, just as a thought experiment,
If God this evening fundered a holy yes to every prayer you've prayed in the last week, what would happen to the people in your life?
I'm talking about your family members, your neighbors, and your friends.
What would happen?
Who would come to faith?
Whose marriage would be restored?
Who would meet that special someone?
Who would find a job?
and get basic provision, who would forgive and who would get forgiven, whose body would be healed, whose mind would be restored.
And if the honest answer is that next week, the people in my life would proceed pretty much the same as they did the last week.
What does that mean?
What does that expose in me?
Do not treat prayer the way a child treats Plato cookies.
Pray to the God who hears and loves to give good gifts to his children.
To pray for someone else is the holy combination of compassion and hope that God is a father who collects all of my prayers, that he is generous with the resources of heaven, and he has vested me with a consequential role in the distribution of heaven on earth today.
All right.
So at this point, we've been entirely in the clouds.
But of course, heaven isn't an
or prayers that an in heaven exercise alone.
It's an honor as it is in heaven kind of exercise.
So we need to bring this from the clouds down to the earth.
And for that, we're gonna turn to a very familiar practical framework, the when, what, and how of praying compassion.
So let's get our start with when.
What's significant about praying compassionally for others right at the midpoint of the day?
Well, in John chapter four, we meet Jesus at that precise hour.
Jesus, tired as he was from the journey set down by a well.
It was about noon.
In the morning, good intention and positive willpower is at its very highest.
But by the afternoon, when we zone out at our desks, we mindlessly scroll on our devices, we set our sights on the evening's rest, planning and scheming happy hour or tonight's dinner or a show that I'm going to veg out to on the calculator.
At midday,
we have an insatiable appetite for escape.
Escape into my thoughts, into my phone, into my task list, or project, escape into the better future I'm planning than the present I'm actually living.
At midday, the human tendency to turn inward to magnify the self is at its very highest.
All the way back in the fourth century, the Christian desert father of Agrias called or coined the term the noonday demon for this human tendency.
So here sits the Alpha and the Omega himself, right on the rim of a well, feeling that familiar human pull of escape, that magnetic urge to zone out, distract, plan, to escape the present somehow.
How did Jesus combat that universal pull?
He turned outward in compassion.
He struck up a conversation with the Samaritan woman.
Maybe you imagine the woman at the well encounter as just the
overflow of Jesus' effortless compassion.
And it could be that.
Many scholars argue, though, that Jesus is acting compassionally in spite of his worn-down resolve and low emotional energy.
This is less unconscious overflow, and it's more conscious, counterintuitive, intentional choice.
Now, there's no way for us to know for sure which one it is, but the picture painted by John certainly seems to lean toward that interpretation, in my opinion.
And the result of Jesus turning outward in compassion at midday is new life.
An unlikely person and an unlikely place becomes a follower of Jesus and then after her an entire Samaritan village.
And then the disciples come back with Jesus' takeout order, but Jesus too exhausted and hungry to even make the trip into the village when he sat down is so renewed by compassion for another person that he's not even hungry anymore.
I have food to eat, you know nothing about.
My food said Jesus is to do the will of Him who sent me and to finish His work.
Jesus was renewed at a bodily and soul level by counterintuitive, intentional compassion right in the heat of the day.
Compassionate prayer for others at midday feels counterintuitive.
It will feel like an intentional, don't feel like it, don't have time.
I'll get to it right after I finish this thing up, kind of choice at first.
But practiced over time, it results in soul nourishment for the person being prayed for and the praying person alike.
So there's when, and that brings us to what?
Or better said, who are we meant to pray for at midday?
We should bring before God the lost,
and the lively.
Now, look, I know that it's really unfashionable these days to speak of anyone outside of relationship to Jesus as Lord as lost.
But Jesus himself uses that word to describe those outside of covenant relationship with him.
Lost isn't church language.
It's Jesus language.
And that makes it worth redeeming.
Lost, meaning searching for a home, for safety, for rest, for who knows how long.
Lost, like that frantic feeling that plunges into your gut when you thought you knew you were going right up until the moment when you suddenly realized that you don't and didn't.
Lost is a word of compassion, not categorization, superiority, or condemnation.
And that's how Jesus describes the experience of life outside of covenant relationship with Him.
Lost, not at fault, just looking for home and unsure
which direction leads there.
And after spending his life compassionately pursuing the laws, Jesus said this to all of his followers, go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I've commanded you.
Now, if that's the great commission to Jesus' followers, and I fancy myself as a follower of Jesus, but the truth is I've gone years without making a single disciple, isn't that
a blinking yellow light on my spiritual health, at the very least?
Well, who am I to tell someone else that Jesus is Lord?
Like, who am I to think that I've got it right and somebody else has it wrong?
I would never force my views on another person.
Now, on one level, I totally empathize with the desire to avoid the worst of religious tropes.
But that's not really our danger in this community, is it?
In a church like ours, isn't the danger at the other end of the spectrum?
I just wanted to gently point out that no one says, who am I to point out that the earth is round?
Who am I to claim that smoking is bad for your health?
Who am I to claim that I have any insight into what's good for an infant to eat and what isn't?
and the perspective on every last one of those things has changed recently in human history.
We freely tell people our views when we believe those views lead to personal wholeness and social harmony.
So the question isn't, who am I to tell someone else that Jesus is Lord?
The question is, do I believe that trusting Jesus as Lord leads to fullness of life for the individual and social harmony for the community?
Because if I do,
than love means sharing that knowledge.
And prayer is how you enlist more than just your best attempt at winsomeness, but God's supernatural power in sharing that knowledge.
I mean, Jesus himself did say, no one comes to me unless the father who sent me draws them and I will raise them up at the last day.
Now, if you're a father of Jesus, you know the father.
You have given free access to stroll right into the heavenly throne room as both a son or a daughter and an heir.
What are you doing with that kind of authority?
Who are you asking him to draw home, to wash in his love, to fill with his life?
The prayer you pray can only become the life that you live.
If it first is the prayer that you pray.
So pray for the lost and then
Also pray for the lowly, by which I mean the needy, the hurting, the vulnerable in your life.
My friend Paul's teenage son stopped going to church a couple years ago.
Fell in with the wrong crowd at school, started dating this girl that seemed to be bad news, and church became where he felt least at home, least welcome, least like himself.
At least that's what he said.
And so he just threw out youth group altogether, and Paul talked all this through with his son,
And his son didn't align with his dad's faith, but he still loved and respected his dad.
And so instead of trying to reason with his son or force his son to practice the way of Jesus according to his perspective, Paul just turned to prayer.
And he has written promise after promise after promise of Jesus and invisible ink all over his son's bedroom walls.
When his son is out late doing who knows what with who knows who on a Saturday,
Paul is awake in his son's room, writing the promises of Jesus all over his son's walls, praying those promises into his son's life.
You and I, we tend to pray problems.
God, this friend is dealing with blank.
But scripture counsels us to pray God's promises instead of our problems.
God, you say blank.
So make good on that promise in this life, in this issue, in this need.
The loss, the lowly, and the final of the lively meaning, who do I perceive new life to be growing within?
A who in my life at present is coming alive spiritually, is taking a new risk vocationally, is carrying a new child parentally?
Who just started seeing someone new or move cities or began volunteering their time?
Who is on the cusp of new life?
in some form or another, compassionately shoulder it with them in prayer.
And that finally brings us to how.
How do I pray for others with compassion and hope?
We've already covered how.
But let me just add a warning label to that.
When you pray compassion, assume participation
Compassion you may recall from earlier in this series comes from the Hebrew Raham, which literally means co-sufferer, and it is linguistically tied to the Hebrew word for womb.
As in a mother's womb, the two terms are very closely related in the Bible.
So according to the unfolding story of God, compassion is to take the needs of another within myself.
To make your burden my burden, your need my need, your weeping my weeping, your hurting my hurting.
But compassion isn't only to take in another's need and keep it there, that's empathy.
Compassion is to carry the need of another person in my womb, so that by entering into the suffering of another, I then birth some variety of new life back into the world.
My wife, Kirsten, is an experienced birth doula.
She companions women and counsels them from pregnancy to delivery in a little while after that.
She counsels them on birth plan and nutrition and lactation and adjusting from hospital back to home.
And she companions her clients through labor and delivery.
And every time Kirsten gets home from a birth, she is sore and exhausted.
Because she's always spent something like 20 hours in like deep squat positions, providing just the right amount of therapeutic pressure at just the right points.
Now, there's someone in labor and delivery who is suffering, and it's not Kirsten.
But Kirsten companions that woman by entering into her suffering, relieving it just a little bit as she can, taking some small part of it on herself.
And that's what compassion is.
And that's how we pray for others at midday.
Evelyn Underhill said, real intercession is a form of sacrifice.
And sacrifice always costs something.
The Apostle John writes, this is how we know what love is.
Jesus Christ laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers and sisters.
Dear children, let us not love with words or speech, but with actions and in truth.
God's love for you is not an abstract concept.
It is not a comforting story or a philosophical idea.
God's love for you took on hands and feet.
Hands that touched the leper that was told he was on touchable feet that went to the sex worker that was told she was too far gone for redemption.
Hands and feet that bore nails as he prayed for the weeping, the mocking, and the one with the hammer in his hands all alike.
Father forgive them.
Love spoken but never lived is not love at all.
It's sentiment.
It's well-wishing.
When we pray compassion, we should assume participation that the prayers that are on my lips in private will at the Spirit's invitation and the inspiration become the costly, compassionate, sacrificial love that I live in public.
So the practice for this entire teaching series is prayer, and this week's exercise is praying compassion at midday.
We will do that together around tables this week as we gather in bridge town communities all across our city.
And remember that as a guide for this daily prayer rhythm, if you have not already, download the Lectio 365 app, which walks you through a unique morning midday and evening prayers along this rhythm every single day.
Thanks for joining the Bridgestown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgestown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgestown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at bridgestown.church.gov.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.